Command	Syntax	Purpose
Initialize Repository	git init	Creates a new Git repository in the current folder.
Check Status	git status	Shows modified, staged, and untracked files.
Configure Username	git config --global user.name "Your Name"	Sets the Git username.
Configure Email	git config --global user.email "you@example.com"	Sets the Git email address.
Add Single File	git add filename	Adds a specific file to the staging area.
Add All Files	git add .	Adds all changed files to the staging area.
Commit Changes	git commit -m "Initial commit"	Saves the staged changes with a message.
View Commit History	git log	Displays the commit history.
Create New Branch	git branch branch-name	Creates a new branch.
List Branches	git branch	Displays all local branches.
Switch Branch	git checkout branch-name	Switches to another branch.
Create & Switch Branch	git checkout -b branch-name	Creates and immediately switches to a new branch.
Merge Branch	git merge branch-name	Merges the specified branch into the current branch.
Delete Branch	git branch -d branch-name	Deletes a local branch.
Add Remote Repository	git remote add origin https://github.com/user/repository.git	Connects the local repository to GitHub.
View Remote	git remote -v	Shows remote repository URLs.
Push First Time	git push -u origin main	Pushes the main branch and sets upstream.
Push Changes	git push origin main	Uploads local commits to GitHub.
Pull Latest Changes	git pull origin main	Downloads and merges changes from GitHub.
Clone Repository	git clone https://github.com/user/repository.git	Downloads an existing GitHub repository.
Fetch Updates	git fetch	Retrieves updates without merging them.
View Differences	git diff	Shows changes between working directory and repository.
Restore File	git restore filename	Restores a file to its previous state.
Remove File	git rm filename	Deletes a file and stages the deletion.
Rename File	git mv oldname newname	Renames a file in Git.
View Remote Branches	git branch -r	Lists remote branches.
View All Branches	git branch -a	Lists local and remote branches.
Stash Changes	git stash	Temporarily saves uncommitted changes.
Apply Stash	git stash pop	Restores the most recent stashed changes.
Typical Git Workflow
git init
git status
git add .
git commit -m "Initial Commit"
git branch feature
git checkout feature
git add .
git commit -m "Feature Added"
git checkout main
git merge feature
git remote add origin https://github.com/username/repository.git
git push -u origin main
git pull origin main
git push origin main
Frequently Used Commands
git init
git status
git add filename
git add .
git commit -m "message"
git branch branch-name
git checkout branch-name
git checkout -b branch-name
git merge branch-name
git pull origin main
git push origin main
git push -u origin main
git clone repository-url
git log
git diff

These are the most commonly used Git and GitHub commands for beginners, practical labs, interviews, and day-to-day development.
